.. include:: links.rst

.. Assimilate documentation master file

Assimilate â€” Front-End to Borg Backup
=====================================

| Version: 0.0b7
| Released: 2025-04-01
| Please report all bugs and suggestions on GitHub_.


What is Assimilate?
-------------------

*Assimilate* is a simple command line utility to orchestrate backups. It is
built as a front-end to BorgBackup_, a powerful and fast de-duplicating backup
program.  With *Assimilate*, you specify all the details about your backups once
in advance, and then use a very simple command line interface for your
day-to-day activities.

Use of *Assimilate* does not preclude the use of *Borg* directly on the same 
repository.  The philosophy of *Assimilate* is to provide commands that you would 
use often and in an interactive manner with the expectation that you would use 
*Borg* directly for more unusual or esoteric situations.


Why Assimilate?
---------------

There are alternatives to *Assimilate* such as BorgMatic_ and Vorta_, both of 
which are also front-ends to *BorgBackup*.  *BorgMatic* has a command line 
interface like *Assimilate* while *Vorta* is GUI-based.  *Assimilate* 
distinguishes itself by providing a command line interface that is very 
efficient for common tasks, such as creating archives (backups), restoring files 
or directories, or comparing existing files to those in an archive.  Also, 
*Assimilate* naturally supports multiple configurations.  This feature can be 
used to simultaneously backup to a local repository, which provides rapid 
restores, and an off-site repository, which provides increased safety in case of 
a local disaster.  Or it can be used to apply different retention rules to 
directories.   For example you might want to use conservative retention rules to 
protect precious files that are not frequently accessed, such as photos, and 
aggressive retention rules for source code it held in data management systems 
like *GitHub*.

.. important::

    *Assimilate* is the next generation of Emborg_ that is designed to work with 
    *Borg 2.0*.  You should use *Emborg* if you are using an earlier version of 
    *Borg* and if you are currently an *Emborg* user you will need to switch to 
    *Assimilate* when you upgrade to *Borg 2.0*.

    All future development is moving to *Assimilate* and *Emborg* is 
    transitioning to maintenance support only.


Why Borg?
---------

Well, everyone needs to backup their files. So perhaps the questions should be: 
why not *Duplicity*?  Duplicity_ has been the standard way to do backups on Unix 
systems for many years.

*Duplicity* provides full and incremental backups. A full backup makes complete 
copies of each file. With an incremental backup, only the difference between the 
current and previous versions of the file are saved.  Thus, to retrieve a file 
from the backup, *Duplicity* must first get the original version of the file, 
and then apply each change. That approach results in the following issues:

#. The recovery process is slow because the desired file is reconstructed from 
   possibly a large number of change sets, each of which must be downloaded from 
   a remote repository before it can be applied. The change sets are large, so 
   the recovery of even small files can require downloading a large amount of 
   data.  It is common that the recovery of a single small file could require 
   many hours.

#. Because the recovery process requires so many steps, it can be fragile.  
   Apparently *Duplicity* keeps all the change sets open during the recovery 
   process, and so the recovery process can fail because the operating system 
   limits how many files you can open at any one time.

#. Generally, when there are problems, you only find them when you try to 
   recover a file.  At that point it is too late.

#. *Duplicity* does not do de-duplication, so if your were to have multiple 
   copies of the same file, or if you moved a file, then you would keep multiple 
   copies of it.

The first two issues can be reduced with frequent full backups, but this greatly 
increases the space you need to hold your backups.

*Borg* works in a very different way. When *Borg* encounters a file, it first 
determines whether it is new or not. The file is determined to be new if the 
contents of that file do not already exist in the repository, in which case it 
copies the contents into the repository.  Then, either way, it associates 
a pointer to the file's contents with the filepath.  This makes it naturally 
de-duplicating.  When it comes time to recover a file, it simply uses the file 
path to find the contents.  In this way, it only retrieves the data it needs.  
There is no complicated and fragile process needed to reconstruct the file from 
a long string of differences.

After living with *Duplicity* for many years, I now find the *Borg* recovery 
process stunningly fast and extremely reliable.  I am completely sold on *Borg* 
and will never use *Duplicity* again.


Terminology
-----------

It is helpful to understand a few terms that are used by *Borg* to describe your 
backups.

:repository:
    This is the location where all of your files are backed up to. It may be on 
    a local file system or it may be remote, in which case it is accessed using 
    *ssh*.

    A repository consists of a collection of disembodied and deduplicated file 
    contents along with a collection of archives.

:archive:
    This is a snapshot of the files that existed when a particular backup was 
    run.  Basically, it is a collection of file paths along with pointers to the 
    contents of those files.

:command:
    An operation to perform on a repository, such as creating a new archive 
    (backing up) or extracting a file or directory.

In addition, *Assimilate* add a new concept.

:configuration:
    A collection of rules that define all aspects of how to maintain 
    a repository.  The rules take the form of settings that define the location 
    of the repository, which files should be copied to the repository when 
    backing up, what encryption and compression schemes should be used, how to 
    prune out archives that are no longer worth keeping, etc.

In *Borg* everything needed by a command must be specified as command line 
options.  In *Assimilate* the addition of configurations allows you to simply 
specify the configuration to the command.  The command can then extract the 
information it needs from the configuration.  In this case, command line options 
are only needed for things not available from the configuration, which are 
things that tend to vary from invocation to invocation, like which file you wish 
to extract.

*Assimilate* also allows you to specify a default configuration, so in most 
cases you need not even specify the configuration to a command.


Quick Tour
----------

You must initially describe your repository or repositories to *Assimilate*.  
You do so by adding configuration files to ~/.config/assimilate. At least two 
are required.  First is the file that contains settings that are shared between 
all configurations. This is a NestedText_ file located at 
``~/.config/assimilate/shared.conf.nt``.  Here is an example:

.. code-block:: bash

    # configurations
    default config: home

    # basic settings
    default mount point: ~/tmp/ASSIMILATE
    passcommand: avendesora value --stdout laptop-borg passcode
    encryption: repokey-blake2-chacha20-poly1305
    compression: zstd,1
    notifier: notify-send -u critical {prog_name} "{msg}"

    # things to exclude
    exclude if present: .nobackup
    exclude caches: 'yes
    exclude nodump: 'yes

    # command aliases
    command aliases:
        repo-list:
            - archives
            - recent --last 5
        list: paths

    # command aliases
    logging:
        keep for: 1w
        max entries: 20

There also must be individual settings files for each backup configuration.  
They are also NestedText files.  The above file defines the *root* 
configuration.  The configuration is described in 
``~/.config/assimilate/root.conf.nt``, an example of which is given below.  It 
is designed to back up the whole machine:

.. code-block:: bash

    # repository settings
    repository: borgbase:backups
    archive: {host_name}-{config_name}-{{now}}
    match archives: sh:{host_name}-{config_name}-*

    # basic settings
    passphrase: singer reread marry crucible
    prune after create: 'yes
    check after create: 'yes
    notify: admin@mydomain.com

    # what to backup
    patterns:
        - R /etc
        - R /home
        - R /root
        - R /var
        - R /srv
        - R /opt
        - R /usr/local

        # what to exclude
        - /var/cache
        - /var/lock
        - /var/run
        - /var/tmp
        - /root/.cache
        - /home/*/.cache

    # prune settings
    keep_daily = 7
    keep_weekly = 4
    keep_monthly = 6

Since this configuration needs to back up files that may not be accessible by 
normal users, it should be run by the root user.

Once you have created these files, you can use *Assimilate* to perform common tasks 
that involve your backups.

The first step would be to initialize the remote repository.  A repository must 
be initialized before it can first used.  To do so, one uses the 
:ref:`repo-create command <repo-create>`:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate repo-create

Once the repository is initialized, it is ready for use.  The :ref:`create 
command <create>` creates an archive, meaning that it backs up your current 
files.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate create

Once one or more archives have been created, you can list the available archives 
using the :ref:`repo-list command <repo-list>`.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate repo-list

The :ref:`list command <list>` displays all the files in the most recent 
archive.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate list

You can restrict the listing to those files contained in the current working 
directory using:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate list .

If you give the name of an archive, it displays all the files in the specified 
archive.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate list --archive continuum-root-2025-04-23T18:35:33

Or, you can give a date, in which case the oldest archive created before that 
date is used.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate list --before 2025-04-23

You can also specify the date and time relative to the current moment:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate list --before 1w

The :ref:`compare command <compare>` allows you to see and manage the 
differences between your local files and those in an archive.  You can compare 
individual files or entire directories.  You can use the date and archive 
options to select the particular archive to compare against.  You can use the 
interactive version of the command to graphically view changes and merge them 
back into you local files.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate compare --interactive doc/thesis

The :ref:`restore command <restore>` restores files or directories in place, 
meaning it replaces the current version with the one from the archive.
You can also use the date and archive options to select the particular archive 
to draw from.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ cd ~/bin
    $ assimilate restore accounts.json

The :ref:`mount command <mount>` creates a directory 'BACKUPS' and then mounts 
an archive or the whole repository on this directory.  This allows you to move 
into the archive or repository, navigating, examining, and retrieving files as 
if it were a file system.  Again, you can use the date and archive options to 
select the particular archive to mount.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate mount BACKUPS

The :ref:`umount command <umount>` un-mounts the archive or repository after you 
are done with it.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate umount BACKUPS

The :ref:`due command <due>` tells you when the last successful backup was 
performed.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate due

The :ref:`help command <assimilate_help>` shows you information on how to use 
*Assimilate*.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ assimilate help

There are more commands, but the above are the most commonly used.


Status
------

The :ref:`overdue <overdue>` command can be run in a cron script on either the 
client or the server machine.  It notifies you if your back-ups have not 
completed successfully in a specified period of time.  In addition, *Assimilate* 
can be configured to update monitoring services such as HealthChecks.io_ with 
the status of the backups.


Borg
----

*Borg* has more power than what is exposed with *Assimilate*.  You may
use it directly or through the *Assimilate* :ref:`borg command <borg>` when you 
need that power.  More information can be found at BorgBackup_.


Precautions
-----------

You should assure you have a backup copy of the encryption key and its
passphrase in a safe place (run 'borg key export' to extract the encryption
keys).  This is very important.  If the only copy of the encryption credentials
are on the disk being backed up and if that disk were to fail you would not be
able to access your backups. I recommend the use of SpareKeys_ as a way of 
assuring that you always have access to the essential information, such as your 
*Borg* passphrase and keys, that you would need to get started after 
a catastrophic loss of your disk.

If you keep the passphrase in an *Assimilate* configuration file then you should 
set the permissions for that file so that it is not readable by others:

.. code-block:: bash

   chmod 600 ~/.config/assimilate/*

Better is to simply not store the passphrase in *Assimilate* configuration files.
You can use the *passcommand* setting for this, or you can use Avendesora_, 
which is a flexible password management system. The interface to *Avendesora* is 
already built in to *Assimilate,* but its use is optional (it need not be 
installed).

It is also best, if it can be arranged, to keep your backups at a remote site so
that your backups do not get destroyed in the same disaster, such as a fire or
flood, that claims your original files. One option is RSync_.  Another is 
BorgBase_.  I have experience with both, and both seem quite good.  One I have 
not tried is Hetzner_.

*Borg* supports many different ways of excluding files and directories from your 
backup.  Thus it is always possible that a small mistake results essential files 
from being excluded from your backups.  Once you have performed your first 
backup you should :ref:`mount <mount>` the most recent archive and then 
carefully examine the resulting snapshot and make sure it contains all the 
expected files.

Finally, it is a good idea to practice a recovery. Pretend that you have lost
all your files and then see if you can do a restore from backup. Doing this and
working out the kinks before you lose your files can save you if you ever do
lose your files.


Issues
------

Please ask questions or report problems on GitHub_.


Contents
--------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   installing
   commands
   configuring
   migrating
   monitoring
   accessories
   examples
   releases

* :ref:`genindex`
